NEW Create workflow (#1)
silverstripe/gha-ci: README.md

# GitHub Actions - CI

CI for Silverstripe modules

> Uses feature detection based on files in the root folder such as phpunit.xml.dist to build dynamic matrix of jobs to run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uses feature detection based on files in the root folder such as phpunit.xml.dist to build and run a dynamic matrix of jobs.
```

Author: Updated

It's highly recommended that you use a tagged version (e.g. v1) to ensure stability of your builds. If you have a relatively simple build that you have no intention of ever making more complex e.g. only phpunit tests using phpunit.xml.dist, then this is probably all you need for long term use.

> Note: Unlike other silverstripe/gha-* repositories, this one is a [reusable workflow](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/reusing-workflows) rather than an [action](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/creating-actions/creating-a-composite-action). A reusable workflow is required to create a `matrix`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: Unlike other silverstripe/gha-* repositories, this one is a [reusable workflow](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/reusing-workflows) rather than an [action](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/creating-actions/creating-a-composite-action).
```
I don't think it's necessary to point out that a matrix is required, since that is generated automatically with this workflow - it's not something that the end-user has to create and pass in themselves.

Author: Yeah it's more of a dev note, though it's kind of an important one since someone will at some point wonder why this isn't an action.  I'll probably wonder myself in 3 months :-) The repo does look weird because the yml lives in `.github/workflows/ci.yml` rather than `action.yml` like everything else.

Reviewer: Yup, I agree that the comment as a whole is useful. It's just the part that I've recommended removing that seems unnecessary and arguably confusing. I can see someone thinking "Oh does that mean I can just throw my own matrix in there?"
Though I guess they _kind of_ can, if they turn dynamic matrix off and pass in their own extra jobs. So I guess it's fine.

### Usage

> Create the following file in your module, and substitute the tagged version for the most recent `v` from this module e.g. `@v1`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create the following file in your module, and substitute the tagged version for the most recent `v` from this module e.g. for tag `1.2.3` use `@v1`
```

Author: Have clarified instructions.  I specifically do NOT want people to use tagged versions here, instead to use the `v` tags, due to the lack of caret support in github actions, and because `@v1` is very standard in github actions land

Reviewer: Right, which is what my suggestion also was intended to clarify - it's saying "If you want to use tag 1.2.3, instead declare `@v1`. I guess we can just leave as is for now and add clarification if someone does get confused so it's fine as is for now.

**.github/workflows/ci.yml**
```yml
name: CI

on:
  push:
  pull_request:
  workflow_dispatch:

jobs:
  ci:

>     uses: silverstripe/ghi-ci/.github/workflows/ci.yml@main

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    uses: silverstripe/gha-ci/.github/workflows/ci.yml@main
```

Reviewer: Is it correct to specify `.github/workflows/ci.yml`? Should that be in the root of the repository instead like the actions? Or does it _have_ to be in the `.github/workflows` directory for a reusable workflow?

Author: Updated

Yes unfortunately needs to be in the `.github/workflows` directory because unlike all the others, this is a "shared workflow" rather than an action. I have manually verified this cannot be in the root directory

```

> Set config specific to your needs via "inputs" defined under the `with:` key.  For instance, to disable PHP linting because you module does not does not yet have a `phpcs.xml.dist` file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set config specific to your needs via "inputs" defined under the `with:` key.  For instance, to disable PHP linting because your module does not does not yet have a `phpcs.xml.dist` file
```

Author: Updated

```yml
jobs:
  ci:

>     uses: silverstripe/github-actions-ci-cd/.github/workflows/ci.yml@main

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    uses: silverstripe/gha-ci/.github/workflows/ci.yml@main
```

Author: Updated

    with:
      phplinting: false
```

#### Inputs:

> *Extra composer requirements*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Extra composer requirements
```

Require additional modules through composer for matrix entries. You do not need to quote the string for multiple requirements
`composer_require_extra: silverstripe/widgets:^2 silverstripe/comments:^3`

> *Simple matrix*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Simple matrix
```

> Create a smaller matrix with only the lowest supported PHP version lowest supported MySQL only instead of a full matrix of multiple PHP and database versions. Default is false, enable with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a smaller matrix with only the lowest supported PHP and MySQL versions instead of a full matrix of multiple PHP and database versions. Default is false, enable with:
```
Does settings this to true imply specific values for any of the other inputs, or make any of the other inputs redundant? If so please mention that here as well.

Author: Updated.  Other inputs still functions with simple_matrix set to true

`simple_matrix: true`

> *Dyanmic matrix*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Dynamic matrix
```

Dynamically generate a matrix using feature detection. If disabled, jobs must be defined using the extra_jobs input. Default is true, disable with:
`dynamic_matrix: false`

> *PHPUnit tests*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### PHPUnit tests
```

Author: Updated all of these

> Runs phpunit if config file is phpunit.xml or phpunit.xml.dist is available. Default is true, disable phpunit tests with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Runs PHPunit if the `phpunit.xml` or `phpunit.xml.dist` config file is available. Default is true, disable PHPunit tests with:
```

Author: Updated

`phpunit: false`

> *PHP linting*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### PHP linting
```

> Runs phpcs and phpstan if config files phpcs.xml.dist or phpstan.neon.dist are available. Default is true, disable with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Runs phpcs and phpstan if the `phpcs.xml.dist` or `phpstan.neon.dist` config files are available. Default is true, disable with:
```

Author: Updated

`phplinting: false`

> *PHP coverage*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### PHP coverage
```

> Run codecov, does not require a configuration file. Default is false, though modules on the silverstripe account will always have this enabled, enable with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run codecov, which does not require a configuration file. Default is false, though modules on the silverstripe account will always have this enabled. Enable with:
```

Reviewer: > modules on the silverstripe account will always have this enabled

Is this automatic? Or does this imply that repositories in the silverstripe account must include this input and set it to true as a rule?
If the latter, either make that explicitly clear or remove that part.

Author: Happens in gha-generate-matrix - https://github.com/emteknetnz/gha-generate-matrix/blob/main/job_creator.php#L162

```php
            // phpcoverage also runs unit tests
            // always run on silverstripe account
            if ($run['phpcoverage'] || preg_match('#^silverstripe/#', $githubRepository)) {
```

`phpcoverage: true`

> *End-to-end tests*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### End-to-end tests
```

> Runs behat tests is behat.yml is available. Default is true, disable end-to-end tests with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Runs behat tests if `behat.yml` is available. Default is true, disable with:
```

Author: Updated

`endtoend: false`

> *JS tests*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### JS tests
```

> Runs JS tests such as yarn lint, yarn test and yarn build diff if config file package.json is available. Default is true, disable JS tests with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Runs yarn lint, `yarn test` and `yarn build diff` if the package.json file is available. Default is true, disable JS tests with:
```
"such as" implies that perhaps it dynamically figures out if you're using yarn and maybe runs other tests, etc.

Author: Updated

> Runs JS tests such as yarn lint, yarn test and yarn build diff if config file package.json is available. Default is true, disable JS tests with:

Reviewer: What is `yarn build diff`? What this meant to just be `yarn build` or is there something extra going on here?

Author: It's this https://github.com/emteknetnz/gha-run-tests/blob/main/action.yml#L186

Have updated readme accordingly

`js: false`

> *Extra jobs*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Extra jobs
```

> Define php version and/or db.  All inputs are false by default so you only need to include config for the input you want enabled. All inputs except `dynamic_matrix` and `simple_matrix` are available in this context. Use a multi-line yml string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Define specific test combinations (e.g. php and db versions). All inputs are false by default so you only need to include config for the input(s) you want enabled. All inputs except `dynamic_matrix` and `simple_matrix` are available in this context. There are also some additional options specific to this input (see below). Use a multi-line yml string.
```

Author: Updated

```yml
extra_jobs: |
  - php: '8.0'
    db: pgsql
    phpunit: true
    phpunit_suite: api
  - php: '8.1'
    endtoend: true
    endtoend_suite: admin
    endtoend_config: vendor/silverstripe/admin/behat.yml
```

> *Extra jobs - additional inputs*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
###### Additional options for extra jobs
```

> Additional inputs that can be applied to individual jobs within the extra_jobs input

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional options that can be applied to individual jobs within the `extra_jobs` input
```

Author: They're technically inputs not options

Reviewer: I would argue that saying "inputs" here is confusing because they're just a string _on_ an input... the fact that they're passed into some action later down the chain as inputs isn't useful information here. But it's a tiny detail not worth fighting over, I'm okay leaving this as is.

**php**
The version of PHP to run e.g. 8.1

**db**

> The database to run e.g. mysql80 - for the list of support DB's - see [gha-generate-matrix](https://github.com/silverstripe/gha-generate-matrix/blob/main/script.php)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The database to run e.g. mysql80

For the list of supported databases see [the gha-generate-matrix script](https://github.com/silverstripe/gha-generate-matrix/blob/main/script.php)
```

Author: Updated

**name_suffix**

> Text to suffix to job and artifact names to make them easier to identify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a specific suffix to job and artifact names to make them easier to identify
```

**phpunit_suite**

> The PHPUnit suite to run as defined in phpunit.xml, translates to the `--testsuite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PHPUnit suite to run as defined in `phpunit.xml`. Translates to the `--testsuite`
```
What is "the `--testsuite`"? Feels like this sentence wasn't quite finished.

Author: Updated, finished sentance

**endtoend_suite**

> The end-to-end suite as defined in behat.yml. Must be defined, specify 'root' to run the default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The end-to-end suite as defined in `behat.yml`. Must be defined, specify 'root' to run the default suite
```

Author: Updated

**endtoend_config**

> The behat.yml config file to used if not using the root behat.yml. Only used if running behat tests in a different module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `behat.yml` config file to use if not using the root `behat.yml`. Only used if running behat tests in a different module
```

Author: Updated

# GitHub Actions - CI

CI for Silverstripe modules

Uses feature detection based on files in the root folder such as phpunit.xml.dist to build and run a dynamic matrix of jobs.

It's highly recommended that you use a tagged version (e.g. v1) to ensure stability of your builds. If you have a relatively simple build that you have no intention of ever making more complex e.g. only phpunit tests using phpunit.xml.dist, then this is probably all you need for long term use.

Note: Unlike other silverstripe/gha-* repositories, this one is a [reusable workflow](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/reusing-workflows) rather than an [action](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/creating-actions/creating-a-composite-action). A reusable workflow is required to create a `matrix`.

### Usage

Create the following file in your module, and substitute the tagged version for the most recent tag prefixed with a `v` e.g. `@v1`

**.github/workflows/ci.yml**
```yml
name: CI

on:
  push:
  pull_request:
  workflow_dispatch:

jobs:
  ci:
    uses: silverstripe/gha-ci/.github/workflows/ci.yml@main
```

> Set config specific to your needs via "inputs" defined under the `with:` key. For instance, to disable PHP linting because your module does not does not yet have a `phpcs.xml.dist` file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set config specific to your needs via "inputs" defined under the `with:` key. For instance, to disable PHP linting because your module does not yet have a `phpcs.xml.dist` file
```
Sorry, should have noticed this last time through

Author: Updated

```yml
jobs:
  ci:
    uses: silverstripe/gha-ci/.github/workflows/ci.yml@main
    with:
      phplinting: false
```

#### Inputs:

##### Extra composer requirements
Require additional modules through composer for matrix entries. You do not need to quote the string for multiple requirements
`composer_require_extra: silverstripe/widgets:^2 silverstripe/comments:^3`

##### Simple matrix
Create a smaller matrix with only the lowest supported PHP version lowest supported MySQL only instead of a full matrix of multiple PHP and database versions. Default is false, enable with:
`simple_matrix: true`

> ##### Dyanmic matrix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Dynamic matrix
```

Author: Updated

`phpcoverage: true`

##### End-to-end tests
Runs behat tests if `behat.yml` is available. Default is true, disable with:
`endtoend: false`

##### JS tests
Runs `yarn lint`, `yarn test` and `yarn build` + `git diff-files` + `git diff` if the package.json file is available. Default is true, disable JS tests with:
`js: false`

##### Extra jobs
Define specific test combinations (e.g. php and db versions). All inputs are false by default so you only need to include config for the input(s) you want enabled. All inputs except `dynamic_matrix` and `simple_matrix` are available in this context. There are also some additional inputs specific to the extra_jobs input (see below). Use a multi-line yml string
```yml
extra_jobs: |
  - php: '8.0'
    db: pgsql
    phpunit: true
    phpunit_suite: api
  - php: '8.1'
    endtoend: true
    endtoend_suite: admin
    endtoend_config: vendor/silverstripe/admin/behat.yml
```

##### Extra jobs - additional inputs
Additional inputs that can be applied to individual jobs within the extra_jobs input

###### php
The version of PHP to run e.g. 8.1

###### db
The database to run e.g. mysql80

> For the list of supported databases see [the gha-generate-matrix script](https://github.com/silverstripe/gha-generate-matrix/blob/main/job_creator.php)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For the list of supported databases see [the gha-generate-matrix script](https://github.com/silverstripe/gha-generate-matrix/blob/main/job_creator.php)
```

Author: Updated

###### name_suffix

> Add a specific suffix to job and artifact names to make them easier to identify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a specific suffix to job and artifact names to make them easier to identify. This will be trucated if greater than 20 characters.
```

Author: Updated

> Add a specific suffix to job and artifact names to make them easier to identify. This will be trucated if greater than 20 characters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a specific suffix to job and artifact names to make them easier to identify. This will be trucated if greater than 20 characters. Must match the regex `[a-zA-Z0-9_\- ]`
```
Feel free to reword that, so long as it's clear what characters are valid.

Author: Updated

###### phpunit_suite

> The PHPUnit suite to run as defined in `phpunit.xml`. Translates to the `--testsuite` parameter passed to `phpunit`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PHPUnit suite to run as defined in `phpunit.xml`. Translates to the `--testsuite` parameter passed to `phpunit`. Specify 'all' to run all PHPunit suites available in the context of this module/recipe.
```

Author: Updated
